Condensed Summary of Official Zigzag
===

Theodor Holm Nelson, Director, Project Xanadu



NOT ALL OF THIS HAS TO BE IMPLEMENTED IN AN OFFICIAL ZIGZAG.  This is simply an overview of the intended design.
 
#BASIC COSMOLOGY

THERE ARE ONLY cells, connections, views, windows with cursors, slices.  All cells must be on valid slices.  

A valid slice has pointers both ways between all connected cells.

There is no action at a distance: all cells affecting each other must touch.

# WINDOWS
We begin with two windows, but the code should support N. All that's lacking is enough keys to step easily in more than 3.

#INTERFACES
An interface consists of a view plus a keyboard/mouse assignment.
 These are handled by a listing in ZigZag.
First keyboard interface is Kblang.
A keyboard interface should be a rank of keystrokes
  next to the executable cells of their specific functions
  (as in gzz, left of 'Bindings', under "Normal mode").
Other keyboard interfaces should be similar ranks which can be
 hopped into place, or otherwise bound to the executables.
This should be extensible by the assignment of mouse actions
 to routines, in the same rank.

#APPLITUDES
An applitude is like an "application", except it is a mode
 in ZigZag, switching to particular views and key assignments.

#CONNECTIONS
ZigZag connections are 1-to-1, directional, untyped,
 positive-to-negative and reciprocated neg-to-pos
 in every dimension.
 (A cell can connect to itself, positive to negative)

#CELL TYPES (for now)

- text [act. indirect start-and-len pointer to text area of slice)
- calc (cell whose value is calculated from time to time, not stored)
- picture
- [no video or audio for now]
- executable
- stepper-- a cell walking along a rank/list. 
  The stepper is connected posward to a cell on some rank
    in some dimension.
  Imagine as a phonograph needle or a read head on a tape.
  Each time you tell it "step" + dir, it goes to
  the next cell on the rank.  Used in dimwheels.
  (In the Azz prototype there were two steppers
  in d.cursor.  If they were both connected to the
  same cell in d.cursor, it meant that cell was the
  center of both views.) 
  (Stepper rule: two steppers can be on the same cell,
    provided that one is on the other stepper.  
    This is interpreted as two steppers on the same cell.) 
 
#CELL MODES (for now-- mostly apply to any type)
  (calculated remote clone would be unworkable but is not logically forbidden)
- (no mode)
- clone
- remote clone

#STORAGE IN SLICES
A slice (set of zzcells) has two areas:

* cells
* content
text cells (texels) are secretly pointers into a text area, thus giving permanized addresses to all the text

# DIMENSION TYPES-- for now
- plain dimensions
- special dimensions (action dimensions?)
	- z.clone, how clones are handled (cannot be changed by hand, only by making and deleting clones
	- z.xeq, as a way of promoting scriptability
-containment dimensions: experimental.
	..contain, z..contained-set
	The first of these is a hierarchical relation of containment.
	The second, at right angles, specifies a list of contained objects. 
	This works for mapping boxes and folders, and programs, but not for other things.
   
   
# BASIC DIMENSIONS
* Utility dimensions: d.1, d.2, d.3, d.4
* Zystem dimensions: z.clone, z.xeq
* Graphical dimensions: gr.1, gr.2, gr.(whatever)
	* Special-purpose graphical dimensions, assigned by users,
	* shd be gr.(userstring).N, allowing graphical dimensions to be grouped and stepped
* z.home connects the home cells of each resident slice.
* z.sliceversion takes effect when two versions of a slice are resident.
	* It connects each cell to its corresponding version in the other slice.
* z.preflet allows a cell to express a latent connection to a particular cell on another slice.  The preflet is a cell
along z.preflet which specifies what cell and what dimension--
possibly with a remote clone of that cell.  When that
connection is made, the preflet flips in the opposite dimension
to record the cell it should reconnect to when the desired slice
is no longer resident.

#VIEWS
A view program shows zzcells and their connections,
 or is GENERATED BY zzcells and their connections.
 Thus in principle a ZigZag applitude could look like any software.
MUST ALWAYS HAVE
- row view
- column view
NICE TO HAVE
- vanishing view
etc.

## THE CONEY ISLAND VIEW
I once flew over Coney Island at night, when routes were
 different.  It was a wonderful view of rides.  I seem to
 remember carousels and ferris wheels, but my memory
 may be exaggerating.
Anyway, I would like the system view of ZigZag
 to be like Coney Island at night-- streets and
 dimwheels (like carousels and ferris wheels).

# DIMWHEELS
A dimwheel is a ringrank / ringlist of cells, with 6 steppers--
 one for each axis of the two windows.
The main dimwheel holds ALL the dimensions.
Subdimwheels hold dimensions for a given purpose.
 Selecting a subdimwheel allows you to step through
 a particular subset of dimensions.

# SLICES
Every slice has a home cell.  You may step through the
 home cells on all the slices along z.slicehome.
Slice 0 should be all your settings.
Slice 00 is the system, which should be able to change without disturbing your settings.
A slice has
- linked lists of cells 
- when resident, we allow unseen optimizations which
 don't affect the cosmology are allowed, e.g.
 hidden head-to-tail, "synapse"
- a text content area; texels are secretly start-and-length
 pointers to this area
Slices may be versioned, so that preceding versions
 of a particular slice may be walked.  Preceding versions
 (and positions) of cells may be walked along z.sliceversion.

